---
title: MOBIL
date: 2023-06-01
math:  true
mermaid: false
img_path: /assets/images/
categories: [autonomous_driving]
tags: []
---

This post is to review the classical lane change model: MOBIL.


# Introduction
In autonomous driving simulators, it is always a problem to simulate with fidelity. 
One key problem is making decision when there is a need of lane change. we can design a decision module for every vehicle in the simulator. 
However, if the decision module is too complex, it will results in computational burden; if it is too easy, there is no way to fill the gap between simulation and real world.

MOBIL, which is short for *Minimizing Overall Braking Induced by Lane Changes*, is proposed to solve the lane change problem.


# MOBIL
As previously discussed, MOBIL is used to strike a balance between complexity and fidelity in deciding lane change.

MOBIL decides if a lane change is needed according two criterion:
- incentive criterion, which determines if the potential target lane is more attractive.
- Safety criterion, which determines if the lane change can be performed safely.

MOBIL requires the accelerations on the old and the prospective new lanes, as calculated with the longitudinal model, that is, the IDM model.

## Model equations
### Notations
-  $M$, $B$ to denote the ego vehicle and the following vehicle in the current lane; 
- $M'$ and $B'$ are used to denote the ego vehicle and the following vehicle in the target lane.
- $acc$ mean the actual IDM accelerations
- $acc'$ mean the accelerations after a possible change.

### Explanation
- The safety criterion is satisfied when the IDM braking deceleration $acc'=acc'_{IDM}$ imposed on the back vehicle $B'$ of the target lane after a possible lane change does not exceed a certain limit $b_{save}$, this means, the *safety criterion*:

$$ acc'(B')\ge -b_{save} $$

   is satisfied. This criterion means, *after we change the lane, the following vehicle in the new target lane will not brake sharply.*
- To access the incentive criterion, we weight the *own advantage* on the target lane  against the *disadvantaged imposed to other drivers*
   a **politeness factor** $p$ balances the altruistic behavior and selfish behavior:

$$ acc'(M')-acc(M)\geq p\left[(acc(B) - acc'(B))+(acc(B')-acc'(B'))\right] + a_{thr} $$

  - The own advantage is measured by $acc'(M')-acc(M)$ after the change
  - The combined disadvantage is given by the sum of advantage gained by the original following vehicle $(acc(B) - acc'(B))$, and the target following vehicle  $(acc(B')-acc'(B'))$.
  - An additional lane-change threshold $a_{thr}$ is added to avoid frantic lane hopping.

# Model parameters
MOBIL provides typical values for model parameters:

| Parameter | Default value | Remark |
| :---: | :---: | :---:|
| $p$ | $(0,0.5]$ | realistic behavior |
| $b_{save}$ | $4m/s^2$ | $\leq 9m/s^2$ | 
| $a_{thr}$ | $0.2m/s^2$ | $\leq a$ where $a$ is the maximum acceleration | 
| $\Delta b$ |  $0.2m/s^2$ | Bias to the right lane (European only) |

The behavior of the vehicle can be controlled via the value of politeness factor:
- If $p\geq1$, then the behavior of the vehicle is altruistic.
- If $p\in (0,0.5]$, then the behavior of the vehicle is realistic.
- If $p=0$, then the behavior is purely selfish.
- If $p<0$, then the vehicle tends to thwart other drivers.

If there are forced lane change such as 
- entering a freeway via an onramp.
- exiting a freeway
- lane change as a reaction of closing of the actual lane ahead.
then the lane-usage bias can be used to treat this situation.


# Reference
https://traffic-simulation.de/info/info_MOBIL.html
https://www.mtreiber.de/publications/MOBIL_TRB.pdf